I'll divide the Lucifer deal into an academic and a personal perspective. Let's get down to business! 

***ACADEMIC:***

[Standing disclaimer: this is all under the umbrella of "my understanding is that ... "]

Lucifer and Pike is a classic. The issue has a few facets. One is the Taxil Hoax, the other is Pike leaning on Levi waaaaay too hard like I mentioned earlier. 

If you're not familiar with the Taxil Hoax, it was started in the late 1800s by this French dude, Leo Taxil (which was actually a pen name, IIRC his real name was super long). Now, Taxil really, really, really hated Catholics. He was super hardcore about this. He actually kickstarted his career by writing anti-Catholic books,  which ended up landing him in court for libel against the Roman Catholic Church (let's just say RCC). Taking advantage of the RCC's hate of masonry, Taxil publicly recanted all of his past works against the RCC, professed that he had become a Catholic, and started publishing anti-Masonic material. Tons of it - and all of it hoaxed. Because of the new material he was publishing, he even got an audience with the Pope. Then, one day, he makes up this woman, "Diana," who is supposedly in the midst of all of this, specifically involved with Satanic cults that the Masons are supposedly involved in. People didn't really buy that Diana existed, so Taxil promised to introduce her to the world at a press conference. At the press conference, Taxil proclaimed that there was no "Diana," he had been lying all along, and that the RCC had hopeless bought his yarn hook, line, and sinker. Later on he would say that he picked the Masons out of amusement, because the stuff he would be able to say against them would be accepted by the RCC no matter how crazy they were. 

ANYWAY. That was a bit of a sidetrack. Later on, this other dude, Abel de le Rive, wrote a book and leaned heavily on Taxil for his source materials. In one of his books, he claimed that the next three paragraphs were written by Albert Pike (and he cited "Diana" as the source):

> That which we must say to the world is that we worship a god, but it is the god that one adores without superstition. To you, Sovereign Grand Inspectors General, we say this, that you may repeat it to the brethren of the 32nd, 31st and 30th degrees: The masonic Religion should be, by all of us initiates of the higher degrees, maintained in the Purity of the Luciferian doctrine. If Lucifer were not God, would Adonay and his priests calumniate him?

> Yes, Lucifer is God, and unfortunately Adonay is also god. For the eternal law is that there is no light without shade, no beauty without ugliness, no white without black, for the absolute can only exist as two gods; darkness being necessary for light to serve as its foil as the pedestal is necessary to the statue, and the brake to the locomotive....

> Thus, the doctrine of Satanism is a heresy, and the true and pure philosophical religion is the belief in Lucifer, the equal of Adonay; but Lucifer, God of Light and God of Good, is struggling for humanity against Adonay, the God of Darkness and Evil.

Later on, after Taxil announced that he pulled a fast one on everybody, de la Rive recanted almost everything he'd ever written about Masonry, including the book that contains the fictitious quote above. 

Moving on to Pike leaning on Levi...

Pike does, actually, mention Lucifer, but only briefly, and a couple of times. Here are the instances where he mentions Lucifer.

"Chapter 3: The Master," in a passage discussing hypocrisy:
> To steal the livery of the Court of God to serve the Devil withal; to pretend to believe in a God of mercy and a Redeemer of love, and persecute those of a different faith; to devour widows houses, and for a pretence make long prayers; to preach continence, and wallow in lust; to inculcate humility, and in pride surpass Lucifer; to pay tithe, and omit the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith; to strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel; to make clean the outside of the cup and platter, keeping them full within of extortion and excess; to appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within be full of hypocrisy and iniquity, is indeed to be like unto whited sepulchres, which appear beautiful outward, but are within full of bones of the dead and of all uncleanness.

Looks good. Not too much to worry about there.

Also from Ch.3, discussing the dangers of free will:
> The true name of Satan, the Kabalists say, is that of Yahveh reversed; for Satan is not a black god, but the negation of God. The Devil is the personification of Atheism or Idolatry.

> For the Initiates, this is not a Person, but a Force, created for good, but which may serve for evil. It is the instrument of Liberty or Free Will. They represent this Force, which presides over the physical generation, under the mythologic and horned form of the God PAN; thence came the he-goat of the Sabbat, brother of the Ancient Serpent, and the Light-bearer or Phosphor, of which the poets have made the false Lucifer of the legend.

Okey-dokey, we got real weird real fast. This is one of those things were we have to start digging for context. In the general discussion surrounding this passage, Pike asks, "hey, so what's with God and the Israelites being his favorites? Was there no way that there were good people among people who weren't Israelites?" The unwritten answer is that of course, yes, there were good people among them - what leads to evil/sinful behavior isn't some dude in a red suit whispering thoughts into your ear, it's having a lack of God in your life. 

In this context, it's also important to pick up on the word *Phosphor*. In Greek (Φωσφόρος), it means "light-bearer," and was translated into Latin as "Lucifer." When the Greeks were talking about Φωσφόρος, they were specifically talking about Venus, which is also known as "the Morning Star." Pike specifically brings up how poets made Phosphorus/Φωσφόρος/Venus/etc into "the false Lucifer of the legend" because (I THINK, not 100% sure) that he's trying to change the context of how he uses "Lucifer." 

The origin of Lucifer in popular use seems to originate from the KJV translation of Isiah 14:12, which is part of a prophet basically roasting a Babylonian king with some pretty intense banter. The word in question is the Hebrew word הֵילֵל ("hay-layl") which translates as "light-bearer." The KJV is pretty much the only English translation which uses "Lucifer," as all the other ones use "morning star" instead of Lucifer, and from the context, it's pretty clear they're not talking about Satan (passages that do refer to Satan seem very clear on it). The Latin Vulgate also uses Lucifer  at other times to describe "morning star" (in 2nd Peter), "light of the morning" and "signs of the zodiac" (both in Job), and "the dawn" (Psalms). *Strong's Concordance* defines "Lucifer" as "shining one, light-bearer.  In other Christian literature, including written prayers, Lucifer is used... to refer to Jesus! That makes sense, given that He was a bearer of light.

Jumping ahead to "XIX: Grand Pontiff," where we find the first of two references to Lucifer in the chapter:
 
> The Apocalypse is, to those who receive the nineteenth Degree, the Apotheosis of that Sublime Faith which aspires to God alone, and despises all the pomps and works of Lucifer. LUCIFER, the Light-bearer! Strange and mysterious name to give to the Spirit of Darkness! Lucifer, the Son of the Morning! Is it he who bears the Light, and with its splendors intolerable blinds feeble, sensual, or selfish Souls? Doubt it not! for traditions are full of Divine Revelations and Inspirations: and Inspiration is not of one Age nor of one Creed. Plato and Philo, also, were inspired.

damn it, Pike, English, please. 

First of all, this passage is interesting, because a good chunk of it is directly ripped from Eliphas Levi. His direct phrasing is:

>Lucifer! The Light-Bearer! How strange a name is given to the spirit of darkness! What, is it he who bears light and who blinds weak souls? Yes, doubt it not, for traditions are full of divine revelations and inspirations. 

